`<manual.pdf>`_

Publishing sphinx-generated docs on github
------------------------------------------
github allows the publishing of static pages associated with a particular
repository (called project pages), which you can read more about at
http://pages.github.com/,

I frequently use Sphinx (http://sphinx.pocoo.org/) for documenting
projects, and would like to have my docs for a repo published to the
gh-pages for that repo.

This strategy uses ideas from
http://lucasbardella.com/report/hosting-your-sphinx-docs-in-github/, which
uses a separate directory for docs and keeps the autogenerated stuff out of
the main repo.  This in contrast to suggestions on
http://pages.github.com/, which does stuff within the repo directory.
Using a separate docs dir made things easier for me to figure out and
configure easier with the Sphinx makefile.

See http://daler.github.com/sphinxdoc-test for the Sphinx-generated version of
this README, created using the commands documented in it...


Protocol
--------

Set up main repository
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
First set up your main repo.  These are the commands I used to set up this
very repo (how meta!)::

    mkdir sphinxdoc-test
    cd sphinxdoc-test
    git init
    touch README
    git add README
    git commit -m 'first commit'
    git remote add origin git@github.com:daler/sphinxdoc-test.git
    git push origin master

Throughout this document, I'll refer to this as the 'main repo' or the
'code dir'.

Set up sphinx within main repository
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Make a dir, ``docs``, that will store documentation source from Sphinx::

    mkdir sphinxdoc-test/docs

Then set up Sphinx from the ``docs`` dir, accepting all the defaults as you see
fit::

    cd docs
    sphinx-quickstart



Set up separate docs repository
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Now we need to set up a completely new directory that will serve as the
build directory for Sphinx.  Here I'm calling it ``sphinxdoc-test-docs``.
Note that it's outside of the main repo dir::

    cd ..
    mkdir sphinxdoc-test-docs
    cd sphinxdoc-test-docs
    
Then clone the repo you just set up on github into a dir called ``html``
(which will be created automatically with the following command)::
    
    git clone git@github.com:daler/sphinxdoc-test.git html
    cd html

The ``html`` dir now has a clone of the repo.  

Next, create a new branch called ``gh-pages``.  This is a special branch name
that github looks for in order to build static html pages::

    git branch gh-pages

The following commands do git fancy stuff that I don't completely understand
yet, suffice to say that after these 3 commands you switch to the new branch
``gh-pages`` and the branch is cleaned out with no files in it::

    git symbolic-ref HEAD refs/heads/gh-pages  # auto-switches branches to gh-pages
    rm .git/index
    git clean -fdx

And confirm we're on gh-pages::

    git branch

I'll refer to this as the 'gh-pages repo'. 



Makefile changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
OK, now the docs repo is set up. Now it's time to make some changes to the
sphinx-generated Makefile back in the main repo so that it builds
documentation in our new gh-pages branch and directory, instead of
cluttering the main code dir.

So go back to the code dir's ``doc`` dir::
    
    cd ../sphinxdoc-test
    cd docs

Here are the changes we're going to make to
``sphinxdoc-test/docs/Makefile`` . . . first, change::
    
    BUILDDIR      = build

to::

    BUILDDIR      = ../../sphinxdoc-test-docs
    PDFBUILDDIR   = /tmp
    PDF           = ../manual.pdf


The first new line points to the new dir and gh-pages branch we just set
up.  So now, running ``make html`` in ``sphinxdoc-test/docs`` will create
an ``html`` dir in ``../../sphinxdoc-test-docs`` . . . and luckily, that's
exactly what we set up the gh-pages repo in.

Before the next two lines make sense, need to make another change . . .
I've added commented lines pointing to the changes::

    latexpdf:
        $(SPHINXBUILD) -b latex $(ALLSPHINXOPTS) $(BUILDDIR)/latex
        @echo "Running LaTeX files through pdflatex..."
        make -C $(BUILDDIR)/latex all-pdf
        @echo "pdflatex finished; the PDF files are in $(BUILDDIR)/latex."

to::

    latexpdf: 
        $(SPHINXBUILD) -b latex $(ALLSPHINXOPTS) $(PDFBUILDDIR)/latex
        #                                          ^^^
        @echo "Running LaTeX files through pdflatex..."
        make -C $(PDFBUILDDIR)/latex all-pdf
        #         ^^^
        cp $(PDFBUILDDIR)/latex/*.pdf $(PDF)
        #^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
        @echo "pdflatex finished; see $(PDF)"

All these PDF build dir changes put all the LaTeX stuff in a temporary
directory, and then only copy the resulting PDF file to the root dir of the
main repo.  So no cluttering of the main repo with autogenerated doc files,
only the latest build of the PDF manual is included.

index.rst changes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Next, I'd like to only worry about making changes in a single file
(README.rst), and have that propagated to all the docs in various places.
On github, if you have a README.rst file in the root dir, it'll be
converted to nice-ish looking docs. (Sphinx is much better looking, plus
can include module, class, and function documentation to boot, hence going
through all this trouble).

So we need to point sphinx's ``index.rst`` to the ``README.rst`` file in
the root of the main repo.  Turns out that relative path names don't work
in ``index.rst``, so here's a workaround:

Make a new file, ``sphinxdoc-test/docs/source/includeme.rst``.  In there, put
an include directive pointing to the true``README.rst``.  So ``includeme.rst``
should look like this::

    .. include:: ../../README.rst

Then in ``index.rst``, add ``includeme`` to the toctree.  So the relevant part
of ``index.rst`` should look something like::

    .. toctree::
       :maxdepth: 2

       includeme

OK, we should be done with the setup now.

Initial creation and commit workflow
------------------------------------
Commit all code and README.rst (and any other doc source files) in the main
repo, like always::

    git add docs
    git add README.rst
    git commit -m "added docs and README.rst"
    
Then, when you're ready to recreate the docs::

    cd docs
    make html
    make latexpdf
    
Should probably add the newly built manual::

    cd ..
    git add manual.pdf
    git commit -m "added manual.pdf"

Next, change to the gh-pages repo dir and commit the stuff that the ``make
html`` command made::

    cd ../sphinxdoc-test-docs/html
    git add .
    git commit -m "rebuilt docs"

And then publish the newly built docs::

    git push origin gh-pages

Rinse and repeat.  Of course, you could always add a task to the Makefile
to do this building and committing docs, something like::

    buildandcommithtml: html latexpdf
        
        cd $(BUILDDIR)/html; git add . ; git commit -m "rebuilt docs"; git push origin gh-pages

Anyway, now you can view your new pages on http://<user>.github.com/<repo>.
So in this case, it's http://daler.github.com/sphinxdoc-test.

Add a .nojekyll file
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The last thing we have to do is add an empty file called ``.nojekyll`` in
the docs repo.  This tells github's default parsing software to ignore the
sphinx-generated pages that are in the gh-pages branch.  Make sure you
commit it, too::

    cd sphinxdoc-test-docs/html
    touch .nojekyll
    git add .nojekyll
    git commit -m "added .nojekyll"

Directory structure
-------------------
So that we're on the same page, the final directory structure looks like this::

    sphinxdoc-test
    |-- pymodule              <-- whatever your normal python package dir structure is
    |   |-- somepythonmodule.py
    |   `-- othercode.py
    |-- docs
    |   |-- Makefile          <-- edited as described above
    |   `-- source
    |       |-- conf.py
    |       |-- includeme.rst <-- edited as described above
    |       `-- index.rst     <-- edited as described above
    |-- manual.pdf            <-- created by running make latexpdf
    `-- README.rst            <-- where you do most of your writing

    sphinxdoc-test-docs 
    |-- doctrees              <-- this dir is autogenerated, but not
    |   |-- environment.pickle     commited to gh-pages
    |   |-- includeme.doctree
    |   |-- index.doctree
    |   `-- README.doctree
    `-- html                  <-- The docs repo, on the gh-pages branch.
        |-- genindex.html          Everything under here is committed.
        |-- includeme.html
        |-- index.html
        |-- objects.inv
        |-- README.html
        |-- search.html
        |-- searchindex.js
        |-- _sources
        |   |-- includeme.txt
        |   |-- index.txt
        |   `-- README.txt
        `-- _static
            |-- basic.css
            |-- default.css
            |-- doctools.js
            |-- file.png
            |-- jquery.js
            |-- minus.png
            |-- plus.png
            |-- pygments.css
            |-- searchtools.js
            |-- sidebar.js
            `-- underscore.js

Setting up cloned repos on another machine
------------------------------------------
The steps for setting this up on another machine are quite a bit simpler.

The only requirement is that the folder name that will hold the docs repo
must have the same relative path name as is referred to in the Makefile.
So if on one machine I had these repos in ``/data/repos/sphinxdoc-test``
and ``/data/repos/sphinxdoc-test-docs``, I could have them as
``~/sphinxdoc-test-docs`` and ``~/sphinxdoc-test`` respectively.

First set up the main repo; in this example I'm putting it right in my home
directory.  Cloning will automatically create a directory, so you don't
have to make one::

    cd ~
    git clone git@github.com:daler/sphinxdoc-test.git

OK, that's done.  Now to set up the docs repo.  For this, just like for
setting it up in the first place, you need to create a dir first (making
sure it's the same name referred to in the edited Makefile) and then change
to it and clone the ``html`` part of the repo::

    cd ~
    mkdir sphinxdoc-test-docs
    cd sphinxdoc-test-docs
    git clone git@github.com:daler/sphinxdoc-test.git html

Now there's a slight problem -- in the newly cloned ``html`` dir, there
only appears to be one branch and it's the master branch::

    git branch
    # * master

The following command will create a local tracking branch to the ``gh-pages`` branch::

    git checkout -b gh-pages remotes/origin/gh-pages

Now the directories are set up the same way they were in the original setup
described above.


General workflow
----------------
Now that everything is set up, general workflow is to:

    * In the main repo:
        
        - edit and commit code as usual
        - document stuff in README.rst, commit it as usual
        - document stuff that will be in the documentation, but not on the
          main page, in other ``.rst`` files in the ``docs`` directory.
        - change to ``docs`` dir and run ``make html`` to generate the html
          docs in your docs repo.  This should not make any changes to the 
          main repo, so you don't have to commit again
        - if you're making a PDF manual, make that too with ``make
          latexpdf``.  Depending on where you're putting the PDF manual,
          you'll have to commit and push the new version as well.
        - ``git push``
        - change to the docs repo

    * Next, in the docs repo:
        
        - change to the docs repo (make sure you're in the html dir)
        - check to make sure you're on the gh-pages branch
        - ``git commit -a -m "rebuilt docs"``
        - ``git push origin gh-pages``
        
Done!


`sphinxdoc-test/blob/master/manual.pdf`_
